---
id: 798
title: Status Updates
date: 2009-09-24T15:30:58+00:00
author: Greg Wilson
layout: post
guid: http://ucosp.wordpress.com/?p=798
permalink: /2009-2010/basie/2009/09/798/
categories:
  - Basie
  - Eclipse4Edu
  - ElmCity
  - MarkUs
  - RoboCup
  - Status
---
Here are the latest progress reports from the teams (with Ingres, Thunderbird, and WikiDev still to come):

**Basie**
:     * Build a toy application in Django and check it into the Subversion repository to prove that they have started learning the framework.
      * Get Basie running on their development machine and send us a URL so that we can check it.
      * Fix some of our broken test fixtures (long story) and put their changes up for code review.
      * (In pairs) Find examples on the web of prior art related to their chosen sub-project for the term and write a blog post about them.

**Eclipse4Edu**
:   The students are working on some existing bugs in order to get familiar with the project.</p> 
    
      * Dennis Acosta is fixing a number of existing class that have warnings involving ArrayList as a raw type. He needs to make updates on the classes so that the warning is removed (Bug 288854).
      * Peter Lorimer and Maciej Kozlowski are creating and integrating a Cheatsheet mechanism into the JavaLite perspective for creating one&#8217;s first JavaLite project and writing Java code (Bug 288852).
      * Maxime Caron and Nil Goyette are fixing the problem of New Class and New Package buttons being enabled when there is no project selected. They are also fixing the an issue so that the Java Class option should automatically create a Java Project (Bugs 246163 244645 ).

**Elmcity**
:     * Choose a target calendar page on MySpace: any band you like.
      * Install BeautifulSoup and familiarize with it.
      * Try (in teams) two different approaches to parsing title/datetime/location/url info: 
          * using plain regexes
          * using BeautifulSoup
      * Create a standalone script that reads any MySpace calendar page (i.e. the view all link) and writes title/datetime/url info (not iCalendar for now, CSV is fine).
      * Check script into repository.
      * Write up one of these topics: 
          * pros and cons of BeautifulSoup
          * challenges involved in reliably finding required data
          * strategy for creating a service that reads configuration from the web, runs regularly, writes results to the web

**MarkUs**
:     * Begin learning Ruby and Rails by going through some online tutorials and/or building a toy application.
      * Get MarkUs running in a development environment (Windows, Linux and OS X)
      * Start looking at bug fixes or tests.
      * Put any changes up for code review

**RoboCup**
:     * Got the soccer server and monitor code built and running.
      * Gained access to the repositories and started looking at code.
      * Got at least one of the (Python) clients running
    
    They are looking at the Java clients now; we are meeting this evening
  
    to see what progress people have made on that. By the weekend the
  
    target is to be familiarised with the code and to have some idea of
  
    the improvements they want to tackle.

WikiDev
:     * The team has become familiar with WikiDev components, architecture ad code
      * The team has also become familiar with UML models
      * The team self organized in three subgroups 
          * the Waterloo team focuses on parsing XMI
          * the SFU team focuses on the development of the Flash-based front-end
          * the UVic team focuses on developing analyses of the DB data
      * The objective for the sprint is to solidify our understanding of task assignments by establishing a clear understanding of the DB schema that everyone will be dealing with